---
path: "/blog/2019-06-20-lil-swimmer"
date: "2019-06-20"
title: 'Revisiting an old doodle, "Lil Swimmer"'
---

I've been meaning to play around with [Gatsby](https://www.gatsbyjs.org/) for a while, but couldn't really think of anything to make or blog about. Playing around with tools for web application development has been a hobby of mine for a long time, but I've usually been lucky enough to do so as part of my day job as a web application developer. Over the past decade-or-so in software development, I wouldn't often extend my coding efforts beyond "on-the-clock" job time (for sanity). However, sometimes I can't shake an idea out of my head unless I code it out, so I ended up with a lot of scattered, half-baked "code doodles" over the years.

Recently, I was upgrading and cleaning up an older laptop of mine and I found a few of these "doodle" projects. Once I got over a few shivers of embarrassment (e.g. "_why_ did you code it like that Daniel!?"), it was really fun to reminisce. That's when I got another one of those "unshakable" ideas. If I could port some of these doodles to modern javascript, Gatsby would be a wonderful tool to help me publish them and blog about it at the same time!

For my first "code doodle" blog post, I decided to start (somewhat) simple and upgrade an old [Web Canvas API](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/API/Canvas_API) experiment I made back when HTML5 was still pretty new (2015-ish?). Around that time, I had been working on an Android hobby-project where I wrote a bare-bones, 2D graphical rendering library in Java for use with Android's Canvas API. I figured it would be interesting to see how well the same concepts worked with HTML5 Canvas and JavaScript.

The rendering engine itself was _super_ tiny (and not very capable). A few years earlier, I had built some of it by working through online tutorials and reading some books (to satisfy my curiosity on how the internals of game engines worked) and ended up with an implementation that I referred to as the "TinyPix Canvas Rendering Engine". I had made a few (somewhat) interesting things with it on Android, so figured that the same should be possible using the web standard `<canvas>` element.

I was drawing a blank on game ideas at the time... the only decent idea I had was to make something that could convey a sense of _speed_. So I gave myself a few goals to start with:

- The game prototype should be simple enough to write with TinyPix (once ported to JavaScript)
- I should be able to achieve a good framerate (30-60fps) on my laptop, while rendering a bunch of quickly moving "stuff"
- Application architecture should be "good enough" so that I can fiddle with settings or write minimal code to experiment with design and procedurally generated content
- Final result should serve as a decent [incremental prototype](http://hci.ilikecake.ie/env_prototypes.htm) for game controls

I also had some vague, nostalgic ideas reminiscent of the way players zipped around in [Nights into Dreams](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Nights_into_Dreams), but didn't have any coherent design in mind when I started porting TinyPix and doodling.

By the time I finished, I had created a game that I called "Lil Swimmer". The player takes control of a sperm-like entity that must speed through an obstacle-filled track. There are only 4 things a player can do; veer right, veer left, speed up, and slow down. The game keeps track of the player's distance traveled, and the number of obstacles hit.

There was no "goal", "finish line", "game over", or "point" to the game... so maybe I shouldn't call it a "game" at all! That said, I did find it kinda enjoyable (in a meditative sort of way), so figured I'd share it here as part of my first blog post. Posting this might even encourage me enough to improve upon it someday, or develop some type of goal or a more interesting game mechanic. If I were to fully flesh it out, I'd probably want to use a modern game engine or otherwise improve upon existing architecture first. But as an old weekend hobby project to blog about, it'll do just fine as-is!

If I end up working on improvements, I'll write about that process in future posts. Until then, feel free to try it out by clicking the link at the bottom of this page. If you want to take a look at the code or offer feedback, [find me on GitHub](https://github.com/darthrellimnad/haukenaut-blog) where the code for this blog is made available.

[&#9658; Play Lil Swimmer](/lil-swimmer)
